MSF Effects Listing

MSF has, in bits 31-24 of a line of a phrase, 8 bits that define a command.
Bits 23-16 act as parameters to the command. Together, these form the command
column as seen in the editor's pattern view. 

Commands are parsed from column 0 to the maximum numbered column (in channels)
so if a speed command is issued in column 0 and also in column 2, column 2 will
take priority.

There are not a lot of commands so far, so here they are in the order in which
I thought of them. The letter corresponds to the representation of the command.
# Use some example valid, but oddly formatted data
In the command byte, the representation of the letter in lower-case is simply
used. For example, 'a' is 0x61. The command is ORed with 0x60 to remove the
need for distinction between upper and lower case, though lower case is the
intended notation.

H: Hop
Hop aborts the current line of the current phrase, and jumps to the next 
frame to the line specified in the argument. A command of H00 simply jumps to
the next frame. This is different than Jump, but can be used similarly.
An attempt to jump out of range will do nothing. 
This is like 'D' in Famitracker, but is styled after 'H' from LSDJ.

K: Kill
Kill silences the channel after [arg] steps. If the song speed is 6 (default),
K06 is equivelant to putting a note kill in the note column in the next line.
This is useful as a way of doing steccato notes; a K03 in a 6-speed song will
be a very short hit, and an amplitude macro won't be needed for a short hit, 
removing the need for redundant instruments.
This is like 'S' in FamiTracker.

D: Delay
Delay, combined with a note on the same line, will wait [arg] steps until 
putting the note information into the synth registers. [arg] has an effective
max of [speed] frames. Any value above will give odd results, as it will 
delay the triggering of whatever note is at the current line of the phrase.
In other words, it doesn't keep storage of the note information to be delayed,
but will simply play what's on the current line after that amount of time. 

Delay does nothing when not paired with note data on the same line.

This can be used for implementing triplets cheaply without custom instruments
or mucking with the track speed.

O: Output
Lets you set the left and right amplitude coefficients for balancing effects.
Useful for quickly going between channels without needing to create different
instrument entries each time.

S: Speed
Sets the speed (number of steps until line advance) parameter for the song. 
Applies until the song is started over or another command changes it. 

J: Jump
This aborts the current phrase, and goes to frame [arg] instead of the next.
An attempt to jump out of range will do nothing.


